# AES_Python
Homework assignment to implement AES

Due Date: 2/19/2021 (Friday), 11:59pm.
Format: Please submit a zip file of your code in Canvas.
Total Points: 12 points
Note: This is an individual project.
1 Project Description
In this project, you will need to implement the 1st round of encryption in Advanced Encryption
Standard. More specifically,
– Given a message with 128 bits, two subkeys subkey0 and subkey1, your program should be able to
perform one AddKey before Round 1 and the corresponding operations (SubBytes, ShiftRows, MixColumns, and AddKey) in Round 1, and output the result of the encryption after Round 1. (In this
project, we assume S-box which is used in SubBytes is already given and you can find a copy of it from
Lecture 5. We also assume an encryption key has 128 bits in this project.)
– (Additional Task for CS6053) Given a 128-bit encryption key, your program should be able to
generate the first two subkeys, subkey0 and subkey1 according to subkey schedule algorithm.
If you can implement one round of AES, you should be able to easily extend your program to multiple
rounds and have a complete version of AES encryption. In this project, you only need to focus on the 1st
round, and there is no need to extend it into multiple rounds.
2 Basic Requirements
Programming Language: You can use either C/C++, Python or Java. However, C/C++ or
Python is preferred. You can choose any IDE you like, the code you submit should be able to compile
and run in Linux or Windows.
Program Directory: Please name your project folder in the form of aes m123456, where aes is the
name of this project and m123456 is your UCID. The recommended directories of your program should be
organized as follows:
./ aes_m123456 / src
./ aes_m123456 / build
./ aes_m123456 / data
./ aes_m123456 / report . pdf
Normally, folder src should include all the source files and your own header files, e.g., .cpp and .h files.
All the object files and executable files, e.g., .o files, should be under folder build. Folder data has all the
given files and data, and also includes all the files and results generated by the program. In report.pdf
file, you should describe which OS you use, show which language and version you use, and illustrate how
to compile, run and use your code. In addition, you also need to include screenshots for the outputs of each
function in your report (please see details in the next section).
2
3 Project Details
Assume a plaintext file is stored in “../data/plaintext.txt”. A message is in this file is
Two One Nine Two
And two subkeys (in hexadecimal) are given in “../data/subkey example.txt”
5468617473206 d79204b756e67204675
e232fcf191129188b159e4e6d679a293
The subkey on the first line is subkey0 and the subkey on the second line is subkey1. Each has 128 bits.
1. First Round of AES Encryption:
(a) Read a message from file “../data/plaintext.txt”, change each character into ASCII. After that,
you should have 128 bits and obtain an initial state (check the example we mentioned in Lecture 5).
(b) Read the two subkeys from file “../data/subkey example.txt”, calculate one AddKey before Round
1 with subkey0, compute operations in Round 1 (includes SubBytes, ShiftRows, MixColumns and one
AddKey with subkey1). The matrix for MixColumns can be found in Lecture 5, and how to perform
the corresponding multiplication over bytes can be found in Lecture 10.
(c) Print your result after the 1st round of AES encryption in terminal and write the result to a file
“../data/result.txt”. The result needs to be printed and written in hexadecimal.
(d) Take a screenshot for the output of your function in step (c) and include it in your report.
(e) You can use the example we mentioned in Lecture 5 to examine the correctness of your function. But
your function should be generic and output results for other messages.
Note: for the polynomial additions and multiplications over bytes in GF(28
), you can implement them
by yourself based on what we discussed in lecture 9 and 10 or you can find some additional libraries to
perform the operations.
2. (Additional Task for CS6053) Subkey Schedule:
(a) Read the first subkey from file “../data/subkey example.txt”, generate the next subkey using subkey schedule algorithm in AES. Print the next subkey in terminal and write the result to a file
“../data/result subkey.txt”. The result needs to be printed and written in hexadecimal.
(b) Take a screenshot for the output of your function in step (a) and include it in your report.
(c) You can use the example we mentioned in Lecture 6 to examine the correctness of your function. But
your function should be generic and output results for other subkeys.
4 Evaluation
Your project will be evaluated in two aspects.
1. Correctness of Functions (80%): Your program should be able to correctly run all the functions
described in this project. If for some reason, your code cannot be compiled but the logic of your code
is correct, you will still get partial credits.
2. Comments and Descriptions (20%): Write comments and briefly explain each function in your
code, such as inputs, outputs, etc. You may need some of the functions in other projects. Detailed
comments on each function can save your time in other projects. In addition, please clearly explain how
to compile and run your code in report.pdf.
